Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
haemoglobin and oxygen transport. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the structure of haemoglobin.
Haemoglobin is the oxygen-carrying protein of the red cell,
a conjugated protein beautifully adapted to bind and release oxygen.
Each molecule consists of four polypeptide globin chains,
each folded around a haem group, so there are four haem groups per molecule.
Each haem is a porphyrin ring with a central iron atom in the ferrous state,
and it is this ferrous iron that reversibly binds one molecule of oxygen — so one
haemoglobin molecule can carry up to four oxygen molecules.
In normal adult haemoglobin, haemoglobin A,
the four chains are two alpha and two beta chains.
Fetal haemoglobin, haemoglobin F, has two alpha and two gamma chains,
giving it a higher oxygen affinity suited to extracting oxygen across the placenta.
The four-subunit structure is the key to its function, allowing cooperative binding.
So haemoglobin is a four-subunit protein,
each globin chain bearing a haem group whose ferrous iron reversibly binds one
oxygen, so four oxygens per molecule;
adult haemoglobin A has two alpha and two beta chains,
fetal haemoglobin F two alpha and two gamma — a quaternary structure that underlies
cooperative oxygen binding.
How is oxygen carried in the blood?
Oxygen is carried in the blood in two forms, one small and one large.
A small amount is carried dissolved in the plasma,
in direct proportion to the partial pressure of oxygen by Henry's law,
but because oxygen is poorly soluble this dissolved fraction is tiny — only about
three millilitres per litre at a normal arterial oxygen tension — far too little to
meet the body's needs.
The great majority, about ninety-eight per cent, is carried bound to haemoglobin:
each gram of fully saturated haemoglobin carries about one point three four
millilitres of oxygen, so the oxygen content of the blood depends chiefly on the
haemoglobin concentration and its saturation.
The total oxygen content is the sum:
the haemoglobin concentration times one point three four times the fractional
saturation, plus the small dissolved amount.
So oxygen is carried dissolved in plasma — a tiny amount proportional to its
partial pressure — and, for the bulk, bound to haemoglobin,
about one point three four millilitres per gram when saturated;
the oxygen content is the haemoglobin-bound amount plus the dissolved,
making haemoglobin essential to adequate oxygen carriage.
Describe the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve.
The oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve describes the relationship between the
partial pressure of oxygen and the saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen,
and it is one of the most important curves in physiology.
Plotted with the percentage saturation of haemoglobin on the vertical axis against
the partial pressure of oxygen, in kilopascals or millimetres of mercury,
on the horizontal axis, it is not a straight line but a characteristic sigmoid,
or S-shaped, curve.
It rises steeply at low partial pressures,
then flattens to a plateau at higher ones. At the normal arterial partial pressure,
on the flat upper plateau, haemoglobin is about ninety-seven to one hundred per
cent saturated.
At the lower partial pressures of the tissues, on the steep part,
haemoglobin readily gives up its oxygen.
A key landmark is the P-fifty, the partial pressure at which haemoglobin is half
saturated, normally about three point five kilopascals,
or twenty-six millimetres of mercury.
So the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve is a sigmoid relationship of saturation
against oxygen partial pressure — a steep lower portion and a flat upper plateau,
with the P-fifty, the tension for half-saturation,
at about three point five kilopascals — the central description of oxygen carriage.
What is the physiological significance of the sigmoid shape?
The sigmoid shape is not incidental but is physiologically ideal,
arising from cooperative binding — the binding of oxygen to one haem subunit
increasing the affinity of the others — and it perfectly suits the curve to oxygen
loading and unloading.
The flat upper plateau means that over the range of arterial oxygen tensions,
and even if the tension falls somewhat — as at altitude or with mild lung disease —
haemoglobin remains almost fully saturated,
so oxygen loading in the lungs is well protected against falls in alveolar oxygen.
The steep lower portion means that in the tissues, where the oxygen tension is low,
a small fall in tension causes a large release of oxygen,
so haemoglobin readily unloads its oxygen to the tissues,
and can release more when tissue demand raises extraction.
The curve thus secures loading and facilitates unloading.
So the sigmoid shape, from cooperative binding, is physiologically ideal:
the flat plateau safeguards arterial loading against falls in oxygen tension,
while the steep lower part allows large unloading of oxygen to the tissues for
small falls in tension — the shape matching the curve to the needs of loading and
delivery.
What factors shift the dissociation curve, and what is the Bohr effect?
Several factors shift the curve to the right or left,
altering haemoglobin's affinity for oxygen,
with the position usually expressed by the P-fifty.
A rightward shift, a raised P-fifty,
means reduced affinity — haemoglobin releases oxygen more readily to the tissues;
it is caused by a rise in carbon dioxide, a fall in pH (acidosis),
a rise in temperature, and a rise in two-three-bisphosphoglycerate,
the red-cell metabolite.
The influence of carbon dioxide and pH is the Bohr effect:
in the metabolically active tissues,
the high carbon dioxide and low pH shift the curve right,
promoting oxygen release just where it is needed,
while in the lungs the loss of carbon dioxide shifts it back left,
promoting loading — an elegant self-adjusting mechanism.
A leftward shift, a lowered P-fifty, raises affinity, as with alkalosis, cold,
low carbon dioxide and low two-three-bisphosphoglycerate,
and is seen with fetal haemoglobin.
So the curve is shifted right — lower affinity,
easier unloading — by raised carbon dioxide, acidosis,
heat and two-three-bisphosphoglycerate,
the carbon-dioxide and pH effect being the Bohr effect that aids tissue unloading,
and shifted left by the opposite changes — affinity adjusting oxygen delivery to
local conditions.
Define oxygen delivery and the oxygen flux equation.
Oxygen delivery is the total amount of oxygen carried to the tissues by the
circulation each minute, a more complete measure of oxygenation than any single
value because it combines the blood's oxygen content with the flow.
It is the product of the cardiac output and the arterial oxygen content.
The arterial oxygen content, in turn,
is determined chiefly by the haemoglobin concentration,
multiplied by one point three four,
multiplied by the fractional arterial saturation,
plus the small dissolved amount proportional to the oxygen tension.
So oxygen delivery equals cardiac output times the sum of the haemoglobin-bound
oxygen and the dissolved oxygen — the oxygen flux equation.
A normal value is around one thousand millilitres per minute,
of which the tissues normally extract about a quarter.
The equation shows that oxygen delivery depends on three things:
the cardiac output, the haemoglobin,
and the saturation — so a fall in any of these reduces delivery,
and compensation in one can offset another.
So oxygen delivery is cardiac output times arterial oxygen content — the oxygen
flux equation — the content set mainly by haemoglobin and saturation;
normally about a litre a minute, it depends on cardiac output,
haemoglobin and saturation together, a framework central to managing oxygenation.
Describe the abnormal haemoglobins relevant to anaesthesia.
Several variant or modified haemoglobins are important because they impair oxygen
carriage or mislead its measurement.
Carboxyhaemoglobin is formed when carbon monoxide binds haemoglobin,
which it does with an affinity some two hundred times that of oxygen,
so even small amounts occupy binding sites and prevent oxygen carriage,
and it also shifts the curve left, impairing unloading — the basis of carbon
monoxide poisoning; crucially, it is read by the standard pulse oximeter as if it
were oxyhaemoglobin, giving a falsely high reading.
Methaemoglobin is haemoglobin whose iron has been oxidised to the ferric state,
which cannot bind oxygen; it can be caused by certain drugs,
including some local anaesthetics, and it also misleads the pulse oximeter.
Fetal haemoglobin has a higher oxygen affinity, suiting placental transfer.
So the abnormal haemoglobins relevant to anaesthesia include carboxyhaemoglobin,
from carbon monoxide, which blocks carriage and falsely reassures the oximeter;
methaemoglobin, with oxidised iron unable to carry oxygen, caused by certain drugs;
and fetal haemoglobin, with its higher affinity — each affecting oxygen carriage or
its measurement.
What is the relevance of oxygen transport to anaesthesia?
Oxygen transport is at the very heart of anaesthesia,
whose constant aim is to maintain tissue oxygenation.
The oxygen flux equation guides this: oxygen delivery depends on cardiac output,
haemoglobin and arterial saturation,
so the anaesthetist maintains all three — supporting the circulation,
deciding on transfusion, and ensuring adequate oxygenation and ventilation.
The dissociation curve informs interpretation:
the flat plateau explains why saturation is preserved until oxygen tension falls
substantially, and the shifts explain how acidosis,
temperature and carbon dioxide affect unloading.
Pulse oximetry, which measures saturation, is a fundamental monitor,
but its limitations — the false readings with carboxyhaemoglobin and
methaemoglobin, and its unreliability at low saturations or with poor perfusion —
must be understood.
So oxygen transport underlies anaesthesia through the oxygen flux equation,
which directs the maintenance of cardiac output, haemoglobin and saturation;
through the dissociation curve, which explains oxygenation and its shifts;
and through pulse oximetry and its limitations — making the delivery of oxygen to
the tissues the central physiological goal of anaesthetic care.
Pull it together: trace oxygen from the alveolus to the tissue.
I would trace it as a journey governed by the principles of oxygen carriage and
delivery.
In the alveolus, oxygen diffuses down its partial-pressure gradient into the
pulmonary capillary blood, where, on the flat upper plateau of the dissociation
curve, it loads onto haemoglobin to near-full saturation,
aided by the low carbon dioxide there shifting the curve left — the Bohr effect in
reverse.
The oxygenated blood, its content set by the haemoglobin concentration and
saturation, is carried to the tissues by the cardiac output,
the product being the oxygen delivery of about a litre a minute.
In the tissues, the low oxygen tension on the steep part of the curve,
together with the local high carbon dioxide,
acidity and warmth shifting the curve right by the Bohr effect,
causes haemoglobin to release its oxygen,
which diffuses down its gradient to the cells.
So oxygen travels from alveolus to tissue by loading onto haemoglobin on the
protected arterial plateau, being delivered as the product of content and cardiac
output, and unloading on the steep curve aided by the Bohr effect in the tissues —
an integrated system matching oxygen delivery to demand,
and the central concern of anaesthesia.
Explain the molecular basis of the cooperative binding of oxygen.
The cooperative binding that gives the dissociation curve its sigmoid shape arises
from the interaction between the four subunits of the haemoglobin molecule,
which exists in two conformational states.
In the tense, or T, state, favoured when deoxygenated,
the subunits are held in a configuration with a low affinity for oxygen,
so oxygen binds only reluctantly — accounting for the shallow initial part of the
curve.
When a molecule of oxygen does bind to one subunit,
it induces a change in that subunit that is transmitted to the others,
shifting the molecule towards the relaxed, or R, state,
which has a high affinity for oxygen.
So the binding of each successive oxygen makes the binding of the next easier —
positive cooperativity — producing the steep middle part of the curve;
and conversely, the release of oxygen promotes release of the rest.
This is an example of allosteric behaviour,
the binding at one site affecting others.
So cooperative binding arises because haemoglobin shifts between a low-affinity
tense state and a high-affinity relaxed state:
the binding of one oxygen promotes the transition, easing the binding of the next,
while release promotes further release — an allosteric mechanism producing the
sigmoid curve and matching haemoglobin to efficient loading and unloading.
Describe the role of two-three-bisphosphoglycerate.
Two-three-bisphosphoglycerate, a product of the red cell's glycolysis,
is an important regulator of haemoglobin's oxygen affinity,
allowing the red cell to adjust its own oxygen unloading.
It binds to deoxygenated haemoglobin, stabilising the low-affinity tense state,
and so shifts the dissociation curve to the right,
reducing affinity and promoting the release of oxygen to the tissues.
Its concentration rises in conditions of chronic reduced oxygen delivery — chronic
anaemia, chronic hypoxaemia, and adaptation to altitude — thereby helping to
release more oxygen to the tissues as a useful adaptation.
It is relevant to stored blood: during storage,
red-cell two-three-bisphosphoglycerate falls,
so freshly stored blood has a left-shifted curve and a higher affinity,
releasing oxygen less readily until the level is restored after transfusion.
Fetal haemoglobin binds it poorly, contributing to fetal haemoglobin's higher
affinity.
So two-three-bisphosphoglycerate binds and stabilises deoxyhaemoglobin,
shifting the curve right to promote tissue oxygen release;
it rises adaptively in chronic hypoxia and anaemia and falls in stored blood,
left-shifting its curve — a key intracellular regulator of oxygen delivery.
Describe fetal haemoglobin and oxygen transfer across the placenta.
Fetal haemoglobin, haemoglobin F, with two alpha and two gamma chains in place of
the adult's beta chains, is adapted to the task of extracting oxygen from the
mother across the placenta, where the oxygen tension is low.
Its key property is a higher affinity for oxygen than adult haemoglobin,
so its dissociation curve is shifted to the left.
This higher affinity arises largely because fetal haemoglobin binds
two-three-bisphosphoglycerate less avidly.
The consequence is that, at the placenta,
fetal haemoglobin can take up oxygen from the maternal blood even though the
tension is low, because at any given tension it is more saturated than maternal
haemoglobin — oxygen thus transferring down the gradient from mother to fetus,
aided by the double Bohr effect.
Fetal haemoglobin is gradually replaced by adult haemoglobin over the months after
birth.
So fetal haemoglobin, with its gamma chains and reduced binding of
two-three-bisphosphoglycerate, has a higher oxygen affinity and a left-shifted
curve, enabling it to extract oxygen from maternal blood across the placenta
despite the low tension — an adaptation to intrauterine life,
replaced by adult haemoglobin after birth.
How does the oxygen dissociation curve adapt at altitude?
At altitude, the reduced barometric pressure lowers the partial pressure of
inspired and hence alveolar and arterial oxygen, threatening oxygen delivery,
and the body adapts in several ways,
including a change relevant to the dissociation curve.
Acutely, the hypoxaemia drives hyperventilation,
which raises the alveolar oxygen but lowers carbon dioxide,
causing a respiratory alkalosis that itself shifts the curve left,
aiding loading in the lungs.
With acclimatisation over days, the red cell increases its
two-three-bisphosphoglycerate, which shifts the curve to the right,
favouring the unloading of oxygen to the tissues;
this rightward shift is generally the more important for tissue delivery at
moderate altitude, though at extreme altitude a left shift aiding loading may be
preferable.
Other adaptations include increased erythropoiesis raising the haemoglobin,
and increased capillary density.
So at altitude the dissociation curve is influenced by opposing shifts — the
respiratory alkalosis of hyperventilation shifting it left to aid loading,
and the rise in two-three-bisphosphoglycerate shifting it right to aid tissue
unloading — alongside increased ventilation and erythropoiesis,
the body adapting oxygen transport to the hypoxic environment.
Describe the principle and limitations of pulse oximetry.
Pulse oximetry measures the arterial oxygen saturation non-invasively and
continuously, and rests on two physical principles.
The first is spectrophotometric, based on the Beer-Lambert relationship:
oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin absorb red and infrared light differently,
so by passing two wavelengths through the tissue and measuring the absorption,
the ratio of the two forms, and hence the saturation, can be calculated.
The second is plethysmographic: the device isolates the pulsatile,
arterial component of the signal from the non-pulsatile background,
so that it measures the saturation of arterial blood.
Its limitations follow from these principles.
It cannot distinguish carboxyhaemoglobin or methaemoglobin from oxyhaemoglobin,
giving false readings in carbon monoxide poisoning and methaemoglobinaemia.
It requires a pulsatile signal, so it fails in poor perfusion,
hypotension and severe vasoconstriction.
It is unreliable at very low saturations, affected by movement,
certain dyes and nail varnish, and, because of the curve's plateau,
is insensitive to falls in oxygen tension while saturation remains high.
So pulse oximetry derives arterial saturation from the differential light
absorption of the two haemoglobins by the Beer-Lambert principle,
isolating the pulsatile arterial signal;
its limitations include false readings with carboxy- and methaemoglobin,
failure in poor perfusion, unreliability at low saturations,
and insensitivity to falling oxygen tension on the plateau — essential to
understand for safe monitoring.
Describe the types of hypoxia.
Hypoxia — an inadequate supply of oxygen to the tissues — is classified by its
mechanism into four types, a framework that directs diagnosis and treatment.
Hypoxic hypoxia is a low arterial oxygen tension, from a low inspired oxygen,
hypoventilation, diffusion impairment,
or ventilation-perfusion mismatch and shunt — the common respiratory causes;
here the saturation is low.
Anaemic hypoxia is a reduced oxygen-carrying capacity despite a normal arterial
tension, from a low or dysfunctional haemoglobin — anaemia,
carbon monoxide poisoning, methaemoglobinaemia;
the tension and saturation of the available haemoglobin may be normal but the
content is low.
Stagnant, or circulatory, hypoxia is inadequate delivery from low blood flow,
whether global, as in shock and cardiac failure, or local;
the content is normal but the flow is not.
Histotoxic hypoxia is the failure of the tissues to use the oxygen delivered,
as in cyanide poisoning, which blocks the electron transport chain.
So hypoxia is classified as hypoxic — low arterial oxygen;
anaemic — reduced carrying capacity; stagnant — inadequate flow;
and histotoxic — failure of tissue oxygen use;
a classification by mechanism that guides the recognition and treatment of
inadequate tissue oxygenation.
Describe the oxygen cascade.
The oxygen cascade describes the stepwise fall in the partial pressure of oxygen
from the atmosphere down to the mitochondria, where it is used,
each step representing a point at which oxygenation can be impaired.
It begins with the partial pressure of oxygen in the dry atmosphere,
about twenty-one kilopascals at sea level. On inspiration, the gas is humidified,
and the water vapour pressure dilutes the oxygen, lowering its partial pressure.
In the alveolus, the oxygen is further diluted by carbon dioxide and taken up by
the blood, the alveolar value given by the alveolar gas equation,
around fourteen kilopascals.
Across the alveolar membrane there is a small further drop to the arterial blood,
the alveolar-arterial difference.
From the arterial blood, oxygen is delivered and falls further through the
capillary to the tissue and finally to the mitochondria,
where it may be only one or two kilopascals — sufficient for oxidative
phosphorylation.
So the oxygen cascade is the progressive fall in oxygen partial pressure from about
twenty-one kilopascals in the atmosphere, through humidification,
alveolar dilution, the alveolar-arterial difference, and tissue extraction,
to a low value at the mitochondria — a framework identifying where, at each step,
oxygenation may be compromised.
Summarise the determinants of tissue oxygenation.
I would summarise tissue oxygenation as depending on the whole chain from the
inspired gas to the mitochondrion, conveniently grouped into delivery and
utilisation.
Delivery depends first on getting oxygen into the arterial blood — adequate
inspired oxygen, ventilation, gas exchange and a normal dissociation curve to load
haemoglobin; second on the oxygen content — chiefly the haemoglobin concentration
and its saturation; and third on the flow — the cardiac output and its regional
distribution.
Oxygen delivery is the product of cardiac output and content.
At the tissue, unloading is aided by the local Bohr-effect shift,
and utilisation requires that the cells can take up and use the oxygen,
through an intact electron transport chain.
Tissue oxygenation fails if any link fails — the basis of the types of hypoxia.
So tissue oxygenation depends on adequate loading of arterial blood,
sufficient oxygen content from haemoglobin and saturation,
adequate cardiac output and distribution to deliver it, effective unloading,
and the capacity of the cells to use it — an integrated chain whose maintenance,
expressed in the oxygen flux equation, is the central goal of anaesthetic care.
Compare myoglobin with haemoglobin.
Myoglobin is the oxygen-binding protein of muscle,
and comparing it with haemoglobin illuminates how protein structure determines
function.
Myoglobin is a single polypeptide chain with one haem group,
so it binds just one molecule of oxygen,
in contrast to haemoglobin's four chains and four oxygens.
Because it has only one subunit, it cannot show cooperative binding,
so its oxygen dissociation curve is not sigmoid but a rectangular hyperbola,
rising steeply and reaching saturation at low oxygen tensions.
This reflects its much higher affinity for oxygen than haemoglobin — a low P-fifty
— which suits its function: it binds oxygen avidly at the low tensions found in
muscle, acting as a store and as a facilitator of oxygen diffusion to the
mitochondria, releasing it only when the tension falls very low,
as in vigorous exercise.
So myoglobin is a single-subunit, single-haem protein binding one oxygen,
with a hyperbolic, high-affinity dissociation curve and no cooperativity,
suited to storing oxygen in muscle and releasing it only at very low tensions — a
contrast with haemoglobin's four subunits,
cooperative sigmoid curve and role in transport,
illustrating how subunit structure shapes oxygen handling.
Describe mixed venous oxygen and the oxygen extraction ratio.
These measures assess the balance between oxygen delivery and consumption,
complementing the arterial values.
Mixed venous blood is the blood returning to the heart and mixed in the pulmonary
artery, and its oxygen saturation or tension reflects what is left after the
tissues have extracted oxygen — normally a saturation of about seventy-five per
cent and a tension of around five to six kilopascals.
It therefore reflects the global balance between oxygen delivery and consumption:
a fall in mixed venous oxygen indicates that delivery has fallen relative to
consumption — from a low cardiac output,
low haemoglobin or low saturation — or that consumption has risen,
so the tissues extract more.
The oxygen extraction ratio is the fraction of delivered oxygen that the tissues
consume, normally about a quarter, calculated from the arterial and venous contents.
It rises when delivery falls, as a compensation,
until extraction is maximal and consumption becomes delivery-dependent.
So mixed venous oxygen reflects the global balance of oxygen delivery and
consumption, falling when delivery is inadequate or consumption raised,
and the oxygen extraction ratio — normally about a quarter — is the fraction
extracted, rising to compensate for falling delivery;
both are valuable measures of the adequacy of oxygenation.
Describe the management of carbon monoxide poisoning.
Carbon monoxide poisoning, from incomplete combustion,
is dangerous because carbon monoxide binds haemoglobin with about two hundred times
the affinity of oxygen, forming carboxyhaemoglobin,
which cannot carry oxygen and also shifts the dissociation curve left,
impairing the release of what oxygen is carried — so the tissues are doubly
deprived, while the standard pulse oximeter is fooled into reading a normal
saturation.
The diagnosis requires a specific measurement of carboxyhaemoglobin,
by co-oximetry, and a high index of suspicion.
The management rests on displacing the carbon monoxide with oxygen:
high-concentration oxygen, ideally a hundred per cent,
greatly shortens the half-life of carboxyhaemoglobin compared with breathing air,
by mass action; hyperbaric oxygen, raising the dissolved oxygen and further
speeding elimination, is considered for severe poisoning.
Supportive care addresses the hypoxic injury.
So carbon monoxide poisoning forms carboxyhaemoglobin that cannot carry oxygen and
left-shifts the curve, while falsely reassuring the oximeter;
diagnosis needs co-oximetry, and management centres on high-concentration oxygen to
displace the carbon monoxide, with hyperbaric oxygen for severe cases — a poisoning
where understanding the haemoglobin chemistry directs the treatment.
Describe methaemoglobinaemia and its treatment.
Methaemoglobinaemia is the condition in which an abnormal proportion of the
haemoglobin is in the form of methaemoglobin,
in which the iron has been oxidised from the normal ferrous to the ferric state;
ferric iron cannot bind oxygen, so methaemoglobin reduces the oxygen-carrying
capacity, and it also shifts the curve of the remaining normal haemoglobin to the
left, impairing unloading.
Normally a small amount of methaemoglobin forms continuously and is reduced back by
the enzyme methaemoglobin reductase,
but the level rises when oxidant stress overwhelms this — most relevantly in
anaesthesia from certain drugs, including some local anaesthetics such as
prilocaine and benzocaine, and others.
It causes a cyanosis that does not respond to oxygen,
with characteristically chocolate-brown blood, and the pulse oximeter is misled.
The specific treatment is methylene blue,
which provides an alternative pathway to reduce the methaemoglobin back to
functional haemoglobin.
So methaemoglobinaemia is the accumulation of methaemoglobin,
with oxidised ferric iron unable to carry oxygen and left-shifting the curve,
caused by oxidant drugs such as prilocaine overwhelming the reducing enzyme;
it causes oxygen-unresponsive cyanosis and misleads the oximeter,
and is treated specifically with methylene blue.
State and explain the alveolar gas equation.
The alveolar gas equation calculates the partial pressure of oxygen in the
alveolus, which cannot be measured directly but is needed to assess gas exchange,
in particular the alveolar-arterial difference.
In words, the alveolar partial pressure of oxygen equals the partial pressure of
oxygen in the inspired gas, minus the alveolar partial pressure of carbon dioxide
divided by the respiratory quotient.
The inspired oxygen partial pressure is itself the fraction of inspired oxygen
multiplied by the barometric pressure less the saturated water vapour pressure,
since the inspired gas is humidified.
The alveolar carbon dioxide is taken as equal to the arterial value,
which is measured, and the respiratory quotient,
the ratio of carbon dioxide produced to oxygen consumed, is about zero point eight.
The equation shows that the alveolar oxygen is reduced by a low inspired oxygen,
by a high altitude lowering barometric pressure,
and by a high carbon dioxide from hypoventilation.
So the alveolar gas equation gives the alveolar oxygen as the inspired oxygen
partial pressure minus the arterial carbon dioxide divided by the respiratory
quotient — allowing calculation of the alveolar oxygen,
the effects of inspired oxygen, altitude and ventilation upon it,
and the alveolar-arterial difference.
What is the alveolar-arterial oxygen difference, and what does it tell us?
The alveolar-arterial oxygen difference is the difference between the calculated
alveolar partial pressure of oxygen and the measured arterial partial pressure,
and it is a valuable index of the efficiency of oxygen transfer across the lung —
of whether a low arterial oxygen is due to the lung itself or to other causes.
It is calculated by obtaining the alveolar oxygen from the alveolar gas equation
and subtracting the measured arterial oxygen.
A small difference is normal, widening somewhat with age and with a higher inspired
oxygen.
The value lies in interpretation: if the arterial oxygen is low but the
alveolar-arterial difference is normal,
the problem lies outside the lung — hypoventilation or a low inspired oxygen,
which raise the alveolar and arterial oxygen together;
if the difference is widened, there is a defect of gas exchange within the lung —
ventilation-perfusion mismatch, shunt, or a diffusion defect.
So the alveolar-arterial oxygen difference,
the gap between the calculated alveolar and measured arterial oxygen,
indexes the efficiency of pulmonary oxygen transfer:
a normal difference with hypoxaemia points to hypoventilation or low inspired
oxygen, while a widened difference indicates intrapulmonary disease — mismatch,
shunt or diffusion defect — a key step in diagnosing the cause of hypoxaemia.
Describe oxygen toxicity.
Although oxygen is essential and its administration often life-saving,
oxygen itself is toxic in high concentrations over time,
so that oxygen therapy is a balance,
and unnecessary hyperoxia is now recognised as harmful.
The toxicity arises because high oxygen tensions increase the generation of
reactive oxygen species — free radicals — beyond the capacity of the antioxidant
defences, causing oxidative damage to cells.
The lungs, exposed to the highest tensions,
are affected by prolonged high inspired oxygen, with tracheobronchitis and,
eventually, diffuse alveolar damage resembling the acute respiratory distress
syndrome.
At very high pressures, as in hyperbaric oxygen,
central nervous system toxicity can cause convulsions.
In the premature neonate, oxygen contributes to retinopathy of prematurity and
other injury.
Beyond these classic toxicities, even moderate hyperoxia may cause harm through
vasoconstriction and oxidative stress, prompting more conservative oxygen targets.
So oxygen is toxic through excessive generation of reactive oxygen species:
prolonged high inspired oxygen damages the lungs,
very high pressures cause central nervous system toxicity,
and oxygen harms the premature neonate,
while even moderate hyperoxia may be harmful — making oxygen a drug to be titrated,
not given indiscriminately.
Summarise how oxygen carriage and its assessment guide oxygen therapy.
I would draw it together around the principle that the goal is adequate tissue
oxygenation, achieved by optimising the oxygen flux — the product of cardiac output
and arterial oxygen content — and assessed at several levels,
with oxygen given as a titrated drug.
The arterial oxygenation is assessed by the saturation,
monitored continuously by pulse oximetry with its known limitations,
and by the arterial oxygen tension and the alveolar-arterial difference,
which localise the cause of any hypoxaemia.
The content depends on the haemoglobin and saturation;
the delivery adds the cardiac output. The adequacy of the global balance is
reflected in the mixed venous oxygen and the extraction ratio,
and tissue-level adequacy in markers such as lactate.
Oxygen therapy is titrated to maintain adequate but not excessive saturation,
since both hypoxia and hyperoxia harm.
So oxygen carriage and its assessment — saturation and tension for arterial
oxygenation, the alveolar-arterial difference for its cause,
haemoglobin and cardiac output for delivery,
and mixed venous oxygen and lactate for adequacy — guide oxygen therapy as the
titration of a drug to achieve adequate tissue oxygenation while avoiding the harms
of both hypoxia and hyperoxia.
Describe cyanide poisoning and histotoxic hypoxia.
Histotoxic hypoxia is the form of hypoxia in which oxygen is delivered to the
tissues normally but the cells cannot use it,
and its classic cause is cyanide poisoning, which illustrates the principle.
Cyanide acts by binding the ferric iron of the enzyme cytochrome c oxidase,
the final complex of the mitochondrial electron transport chain,
halting oxidative phosphorylation; the cells therefore cannot use oxygen to
generate adenosine triphosphate, despite its presence,
and are forced into anaerobic metabolism, producing a profound lactic acidosis.
A characteristic feature is that, because the tissues are not extracting oxygen,
the venous blood remains highly oxygenated,
so the mixed venous oxygen is high and the arteriovenous difference small — the
tissues are oxygenated but cannot use it.
Treatment aims to bind the cyanide away from the enzyme:
with agents such as hydroxocobalamin, which binds it,
or others that generate methaemoglobin, whose ferric iron competes for the cyanide.
So histotoxic hypoxia is the failure of tissues to use delivered oxygen,
classically from cyanide blocking cytochrome c oxidase in the electron transport
chain, halting oxidative phosphorylation and causing lactic acidosis with a
characteristically high venous oxygen;
treated by binding the cyanide with agents such as hydroxocobalamin — a hypoxia of
utilisation, not delivery.
What is the Hüfner constant, and how does it relate to oxygen-carrying capacity?
The Hüfner constant is the figure that expresses how much oxygen a given mass of
haemoglobin can carry when fully saturated,
and it underlies the calculation of the oxygen content of the blood.
It is the volume of oxygen bound per gram of haemoglobin at full saturation,
and there is a small but instructive discrepancy between its theoretical and its
measured values.
The theoretical value, derived from the molecular weight of haemoglobin and the
assumption that each molecule binds four molecules of oxygen,
is about one point three nine millilitres of oxygen per gram.
The value measured in practice, however,
is slightly lower — around one point three four,
sometimes given as one point three one millilitres per gram — because in real blood
a small proportion of the haemoglobin is always in inactive forms,
such as methaemoglobin and carboxyhaemoglobin, that cannot carry oxygen.
The commonly used value is therefore about one point three four.
So the Hüfner constant is the oxygen carried per gram of fully saturated
haemoglobin — a theoretical one point three nine but a measured one point three
four millilitres per gram, the difference reflecting the inactive haemoglobin forms
always present — the figure used in calculating the oxygen content and so oxygen
delivery.
Describe hyperbaric oxygen therapy and its uses.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is the breathing of oxygen at a pressure greater than
atmospheric, in a pressure chamber,
which markedly increases the oxygen carried in the blood and delivered to the
tissues, by exploiting the physics of gas solubility.
At raised ambient pressure, breathing a high concentration of oxygen greatly
increases the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood,
and although the haemoglobin is already nearly fully saturated at normal pressure,
the amount of oxygen dissolved in the plasma,
which by Henry's law is proportional to its partial pressure,
increases greatly — enough at high pressure to supply a substantial part of the
tissue needs in dissolved form alone.
This underlies its uses. It speeds the elimination of carbon monoxide in severe
poisoning by displacing it and supplying dissolved oxygen.
It supplies oxygen to ischaemic and poorly perfused tissues,
used in some non-healing wounds and infections.
It is the treatment of decompression sickness and gas embolism,
reducing bubble size and improving oxygenation.
So hyperbaric oxygen therapy raises the partial pressure of inspired oxygen by
treatment under pressure, greatly increasing the dissolved oxygen by Henry's law;
its uses include carbon monoxide poisoning, ischaemic wounds and infections,
and decompression sickness and gas embolism — applications founded on the physics
of increased dissolved oxygen.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Haemoglobin is a four-subunit protein,
each globin chain bearing a haem whose ferrous iron reversibly binds one oxygen
(four per molecule); adult HbA is two alpha + two beta chains,
fetal HbF two alpha + two gamma (higher affinity) — the quaternary structure
enabling cooperative binding.
Second, Oxygen is carried dissolved (tiny, proportional to PO2 by Henry's law) and,
for ~98%, bound to haemoglobin (~1.34 mL O2 per gram when saturated);
oxygen content = (Hb × 1.34 × fractional saturation) + dissolved — so content
depends chiefly on haemoglobin and saturation.
Third, The oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve is a sigmoid of saturation vs PO2
(from cooperative binding): a flat upper plateau safeguards arterial loading
against falls in oxygen tension, a steep lower part allows large tissue unloading
for small falls; P50 (half-saturation) is ~3.5 kPa / 26 mmHg.
Fourth, The curve shifts right (lower affinity, easier unloading) with raised CO2,
acidosis, heat and 2,3-BPG — the CO2/pH effect being the Bohr effect that aids
tissue unloading — and left with the opposite (and with HbF);
oxygen delivery = cardiac output × arterial oxygen content (the oxygen flux
equation), ~1 L/min, depending on cardiac output,
haemoglobin and saturation together.
Fifth, Oxygen transport is central to anaesthesia:
the flux equation directs maintenance of cardiac output,
haemoglobin and saturation; abnormal haemoglobins matter (carboxyhaemoglobin from
CO blocks carriage and falsely reassures the oximeter;
methaemoglobin with ferric iron can't carry oxygen and is caused by some drugs);
pulse oximetry is fundamental but has these and other limitations.
Thank you. That concludes the station.